CODING_STANDARD.md, before:

Here a few minimalistic coding rules for the CPROVER source tree.

# Whitespaces

Formatting is enforced using clang-format. For more information about this, see
`COMPILING.md`. A brief summary of the formatting rules is given below:

- Use 2 spaces indent, no tabs.
- No lines wider than 80 chars.
  - When line is wider, do the following:
    - Subsequent lines should be indented two more than the initial line
    - Break after `=` if it is part of an assignment
      - For chained calls, prefer immediately before `.`
    - For other operators (e.g. `&&`, `+`) prefer immediately after the
      operator
    - For brackets, break after the bracket
      - In the case of function calls, put each argument on a separate line if
        they do not fit after one line break
      - Nested function calls do not need to be broken up into separate lines
        even if the outer function call does.
- If a method is bigger than 50 lines, break it into parts.
- Put matching `{ }` into the same column, except for initializer lists and
  lambdas, where you should place `{` directly after the closing `)`. This is
  to comply with clang-format, which doesn't support aligned curly braces in
  these cases.
- Spaces around binary operators (`=`, `+`, `==` ...)
- Space after comma (parameter lists, argument lists, ...)
- Space after colon inside `for`
- For pointers and references, the `*`/`&` should be attached to the variable
  name as opposed to the type. E.g. for a pointer to an int the syntax would
  be: `int *x;`
- No whitespaces at end of line
- No whitespaces in blank lines
- Put argument lists on next line (and indent 2 spaces) if too long
- Put parameters on separate lines (and indent 2 spaces) if too long
- Spaces around colon for inheritance, put inherited into separate lines in
  case of multiple inheritance
- The initializer list follows the constructor with a whitespace around the
  colon.
- `if(...)`, `else`, `for(...)`, `do`, and `while(...)` are always in a
  separate line
- Break expressions in `if`, `for`, `while` if necessary and align them with
  the first character following the opening parenthesis
- Use `{}` instead of `;` for the empty statement
- Single line blocks without `{ }` are allowed, but put braces around
  multi-line blocks
- Use blank lines to visually separate logically cohesive code blocks within a
  function
- Have a newline at the end of a file

# Comments
- Do not use `/* */`
- Each source and header file must start with a comment block stating the
  author. See existing source for an example of the format of this block. This
  should be followed by a Doxygen `\file` comment:
  ```c++
  /// \file
  /// <Some information about this file goes here>
  ```
  Note that the `\file` tag must be immediately followed by a newline in order
  for Doxygen to relate the comment to the current file.
- Each function should be preceded by a Doxygen comment describing that
  function. The format should match the [LLVM
  guidelines](http://llvm.org/docs/CodingStandards.html#doxygen-use-in-documentation-comments),
  with one extension: `\param` and `\return` comments longer than a single line
  should have subsequent lines indented by two spaces, so that the tags stand
  out. An example:
  ```c++
  /// This sentence, until the first dot followed by whitespace, becomes
  /// the brief description. More detailed text follows. Feel free to
  /// break this into paragraphs to aid readability.
  /// \param arg_name: This parameter doesn't need much description
  /// \param [out] long_arg_name: This parameter is mutated by the function.
  ///   Extra info about the parameter gets indented an extra two columns,
  ///   like this.
  /// \return The return value is literally the value returned by the
  ///   function. For out-parameters, use "\param [out]".
  return_typet my_function(argt arg_name, argt &long_arg_name)
  ```
- The priority of documentation is readability. Therefore, feel free to use
  Doxygen features, or to add whitespace for multi-paragraph comment blocks if
  necessary.
- A comment block should immediately precede the definition of the entity it
  documents, which will generally mean that it will live in the source file.
  This allows us to take advantage of the one definition rule. If each entity
  is defined only once, then it is also documented only once.
- The documentation block must *immediately* precede the entity it documents.
  Don't insert empty lines between docs and functions, because this will
  confuse Doxygen.
- Put comments on a separate line
- Use comments to explain the non-obvious
- Use #if 0 for commenting out source code
- Use #ifdef DEBUG to guard debug code

# Naming
- Identifiers may use the characters `[a-z0-9_]` and should start with a
  lower-case letter (parameters in constructors may start with `_`).
- Use American spelling for identifiers.
- Separate basic words by `_`
- Avoid abbreviations (e.g. prefer `symbol_table` to `st`).
- User defined type identifiers have to be terminated by `t`. Moreover, before
  `t` may not be `_`.
- Do not use `m_` prefix nor `_` suffix for names of attributes of structured
  types.
- Enum values may use the characters `[A-Z0-9_]`

# Header files
- Avoid unnecessary `#include`s, especially in header files
- Prefer forward declaration to includes, but forward declare at the top of the
  header file rather than in line
- Guard headers with `#ifndef CPROVER_DIRECTORIES_FILE_H`, etc
- The corresponding header for a given source file should always be the *first*
  include in the source file. For example, given `foo.h` and `foo.cpp`, the
  line `#include "foo.h"` should precede all other include statements in
  `foo.cpp`.
- Use the C++ versions of C headers (e.g. `cmath` instead of `math.h`).
  Some of the C headers use macros instead of functions which can have
  unexpected consequences.

# Makefiles
- Each source file should appear on a separate line
- The final source file should still be followed by a trailing slash
- The last line should be a comment to not be deleted, i.e. should look like:
  ```makefile
  SRC = source_file.cpp \
        source_file2.cpp \
        # Empty last line
  ```
  This ensures the Makefiles can be easily merged.

# Program Command Line Options
- Each program contains a `program_name_parse_optionst` class which should
  contain a define `PROGRAM_NAME_PARSE_OPTIONS` which is a string of all the
  parse options in brackets (with a colon after the bracket if it takes a
  parameter)
- Each parameter should be one per line to yield easy merging
- If parameters are shared between programs, they should be pulled out into a
  common file and then included using a define
- The defines should be `OPT_FLAG_NAMES` which should go into the `OPTIONS`
  define
- The defines should include `HELP_FLAG_NAMES` which should contain the help
  output in the format:
  ```
  " --flag                explanations\n" \
  " --another flag        more explanation\n" \
   <-------30 chars------>
  ```
- The defines may include `PARSE_OPTIONS_FLAG_NAMES` which move the options
  from the command line into the options

# C++ features
- Do not use namespaces, except for anonymous namespaces.
- Prefer use of `typedef` instead of `using`.
- Prefer use of `class` instead of `struct`.
- Write type modifiers before the type specifier.
- Make references `const` whenever possible
- Make member functions `const` whenever possible
- Do not hide base class functions
- You are encouraged to use `override`
- Single argument constructors must be `explicit`
- Avoid implicit conversions
- Avoid `friend` declarations
- Avoid iterators, use ranged `for` instead
- Avoid allocation with `new`/`delete`, use `unique_ptr`
- Avoid pointers, use references
- Avoid `char *`, use `std::string`
- For numbers, use `int`, `unsigned`, `long`, `unsigned long`, `double`
- Use `mp_integer`, not `BigInt`
- Use the functions in util for conversions between numbers and strings
- Avoid C-style functions. Use classes with an `operator()` instead.
- Use `irep_idt` for identifiers (not `std::string`)
- Avoid destructive updates if possible. The `irept` has constant time copy.
- Use instances of `std::size_t` for comparison with return values of `.size()`
  of STL containers and algorithms, and use them as indices to arrays or
  vectors.
- Do not use default values in public functions
- Use assertions to detect programming errors, e.g. whenever you make
  assumptions on how your code is used
- Use exceptions only when the execution of the program has to abort because of
  erroneous user input
- We allow to use 3rd-party libraries directly. No wrapper matching the coding
  rules is required. Allowed libraries are: STL.
- When throwing, omit the brackets, i.e. `throw "error"`.
- Error messages should start with a lower case letter.
- Use the `auto` keyword if and only if one of the following
  - The type is explicitly repeated on the RHS (e.g. a constructor call)
  - Adding the type will increase confusion (e.g. iterators, function pointers)
- Avoid `assert`. If the condition is an actual invariant, use INVARIANT,
  PRECONDITION, POSTCONDITION, CHECK_RETURN, UNREACHABLE or DATA_INVARIANT. If
  there are possible reasons why it might fail, throw an exception.
- All raw pointers (such as those returned by `symbol_tablet::lookup`) are
  assumed to be non-owning, and should not be `delete`d. Raw pointers that
  point to heap-allocated memory should be private data members of an object
  which safely manages the pointer. As such, `new` should only be used in
  constructors, and `delete` in destructors. Never use `malloc` or `free`.

# Architecture-specific code
- Avoid if possible.
- Use `__LINUX__`, `__MACH__`, and `_WIN32` to distinguish the architectures.
- Don't include architecture-specific header files without `#ifdef` ...

# Output
- Do not output to `cout` or `cerr` directly (except in temporary debug code,
  and then guard `#include <iostream>` by `#ifdef DEBUG`)
- Derive from `messaget` if the class produces output and use the streams
  provided (`status()`, `error()`, `debug()`, etc)
- Use `\n` instead of `std::endl`

# Unit tests
- Unit tests are written using [Catch](https://github.com/philsquared/Catch)
- For large classes:
  - Create a separate file that contains the tests for each method of each
    class
  - The file should be named according to
    `unit/class/path/class_name/function_name.cpp`
- For small classes:
  - Create a separate file that contains the tests for all methods of each
    class
  - The file should be named according to `unit/class/path/class_name.cpp`
- Catch supports tagging, tests should be tagged with all the following tags:
  - [core] should be used for all tests unless the test takes more than 1
    second to run, then it should be tagged with [long]
  - [folder_name] of the file being tested
  - [class_name] of the class being tested
  - [function_name] of the function being tested

---

You are allowed to break rules if you have a good reason to do so.

---

# Pre-commit hook to run cpplint locally

To install the hook
```sh
cp .githooks/pre-commit .git/hooks/pre-commit
```
or use a symbolic link. Then, when running git commit, you should get the
linter output (if any) before being prompted to enter a commit message. To
bypass the check (e.g. if there was a false positive), add the option
`--no-verify`.

Commit message:

Adding extra information about invariant messages

CODING_STANDARD.md, after:

Here a few minimalistic coding rules for the CPROVER source tree.

# Whitespaces

Formatting is enforced using clang-format. For more information about this, see
`COMPILING.md`. A brief summary of the formatting rules is given below:

- Use 2 spaces indent, no tabs.
- No lines wider than 80 chars.
  - When line is wider, do the following:
    - Subsequent lines should be indented two more than the initial line
    - Break after `=` if it is part of an assignment
      - For chained calls, prefer immediately before `.`
    - For other operators (e.g. `&&`, `+`) prefer immediately after the
      operator
    - For brackets, break after the bracket
      - In the case of function calls, put each argument on a separate line if
        they do not fit after one line break
      - Nested function calls do not need to be broken up into separate lines
        even if the outer function call does.
- If a method is bigger than 50 lines, break it into parts.
- Put matching `{ }` into the same column, except for initializer lists and
  lambdas, where you should place `{` directly after the closing `)`. This is
  to comply with clang-format, which doesn't support aligned curly braces in
  these cases.
- Spaces around binary operators (`=`, `+`, `==` ...)
- Space after comma (parameter lists, argument lists, ...)
- Space after colon inside `for`
- For pointers and references, the `*`/`&` should be attached to the variable
  name as opposed to the type. E.g. for a pointer to an int the syntax would
  be: `int *x;`
- No whitespaces at end of line
- No whitespaces in blank lines
- Put argument lists on next line (and indent 2 spaces) if too long
- Put parameters on separate lines (and indent 2 spaces) if too long
- Spaces around colon for inheritance, put inherited into separate lines in
  case of multiple inheritance
- The initializer list follows the constructor with a whitespace around the
  colon.
- `if(...)`, `else`, `for(...)`, `do`, and `while(...)` are always in a
  separate line
- Break expressions in `if`, `for`, `while` if necessary and align them with
  the first character following the opening parenthesis
- Use `{}` instead of `;` for the empty statement
- Single line blocks without `{ }` are allowed, but put braces around
  multi-line blocks
- Use blank lines to visually separate logically cohesive code blocks within a
  function
- Have a newline at the end of a file

# Comments
- Do not use `/* */`
- Each source and header file must start with a comment block stating the
  author. See existing source for an example of the format of this block. This
  should be followed by a Doxygen `\file` comment:
  ```c++
  /// \file
  /// <Some information about this file goes here>
  ```
  Note that the `\file` tag must be immediately followed by a newline in order
  for Doxygen to relate the comment to the current file.
- Each function should be preceded by a Doxygen comment describing that
  function. The format should match the [LLVM
  guidelines](http://llvm.org/docs/CodingStandards.html#doxygen-use-in-documentation-comments),
  with one extension: `\param` and `\return` comments longer than a single line
  should have subsequent lines indented by two spaces, so that the tags stand
  out. An example:
  ```c++
  /// This sentence, until the first dot followed by whitespace, becomes
  /// the brief description. More detailed text follows. Feel free to
  /// break this into paragraphs to aid readability.
  /// \param arg_name: This parameter doesn't need much description
  /// \param [out] long_arg_name: This parameter is mutated by the function.
  ///   Extra info about the parameter gets indented an extra two columns,
  ///   like this.
  /// \return The return value is literally the value returned by the
  ///   function. For out-parameters, use "\param [out]".
  return_typet my_function(argt arg_name, argt &long_arg_name)
  ```
- The priority of documentation is readability. Therefore, feel free to use
  Doxygen features, or to add whitespace for multi-paragraph comment blocks if
  necessary.
- A comment block should immediately precede the definition of the entity it
  documents, which will generally mean that it will live in the source file.
  This allows us to take advantage of the one definition rule. If each entity
  is defined only once, then it is also documented only once.
- The documentation block must *immediately* precede the entity it documents.
  Don't insert empty lines between docs and functions, because this will
  confuse Doxygen.
- Put comments on a separate line
- Use comments to explain the non-obvious
- Use #if 0 for commenting out source code
- Use #ifdef DEBUG to guard debug code

# Naming
- Identifiers may use the characters `[a-z0-9_]` and should start with a
  lower-case letter (parameters in constructors may start with `_`).
- Use American spelling for identifiers.
- Separate basic words by `_`
- Avoid abbreviations (e.g. prefer `symbol_table` to `st`).
- User defined type identifiers have to be terminated by `t`. Moreover, before
  `t` may not be `_`.
- Do not use `m_` prefix nor `_` suffix for names of attributes of structured
  types.
- Enum values may use the characters `[A-Z0-9_]`

# Header files
- Avoid unnecessary `#include`s, especially in header files
- Prefer forward declaration to includes, but forward declare at the top of the
  header file rather than in line
- Guard headers with `#ifndef CPROVER_DIRECTORIES_FILE_H`, etc
- The corresponding header for a given source file should always be the *first*
  include in the source file. For example, given `foo.h` and `foo.cpp`, the
  line `#include "foo.h"` should precede all other include statements in
  `foo.cpp`.
- Use the C++ versions of C headers (e.g. `cmath` instead of `math.h`).
  Some of the C headers use macros instead of functions which can have
  unexpected consequences.

# Makefiles
- Each source file should appear on a separate line
- The final source file should still be followed by a trailing slash
- The last line should be a comment to not be deleted, i.e. should look like:
  ```makefile
  SRC = source_file.cpp \
        source_file2.cpp \
        # Empty last line
  ```
  This ensures the Makefiles can be easily merged.

# Program Command Line Options
- Each program contains a `program_name_parse_optionst` class which should
  contain a define `PROGRAM_NAME_PARSE_OPTIONS` which is a string of all the
  parse options in brackets (with a colon after the bracket if it takes a
  parameter)
- Each parameter should be one per line to yield easy merging
- If parameters are shared between programs, they should be pulled out into a
  common file and then included using a define
- The defines should be `OPT_FLAG_NAMES` which should go into the `OPTIONS`
  define
- The defines should include `HELP_FLAG_NAMES` which should contain the help
  output in the format:
  ```
  " --flag                explanations\n" \
  " --another flag        more explanation\n" \
   <-------30 chars------>
  ```
- The defines may include `PARSE_OPTIONS_FLAG_NAMES` which move the options
  from the command line into the options

# C++ features
- Do not use namespaces, except for anonymous namespaces.
- Prefer use of `typedef` instead of `using`.
- Prefer use of `class` instead of `struct`.
- Write type modifiers before the type specifier.
- Make references `const` whenever possible
- Make member functions `const` whenever possible
- Do not hide base class functions
- You are encouraged to use `override`
- Single argument constructors must be `explicit`
- Avoid implicit conversions
- Avoid `friend` declarations
- Avoid iterators, use ranged `for` instead
- Avoid allocation with `new`/`delete`, use `unique_ptr`
- Avoid pointers, use references
- Avoid `char *`, use `std::string`
- For numbers, use `int`, `unsigned`, `long`, `unsigned long`, `double`
- Use `mp_integer`, not `BigInt`
- Use the functions in util for conversions between numbers and strings
- Avoid C-style functions. Use classes with an `operator()` instead.
- Use `irep_idt` for identifiers (not `std::string`)
- Avoid destructive updates if possible. The `irept` has constant time copy.
- Use instances of `std::size_t` for comparison with return values of `.size()`
  of STL containers and algorithms, and use them as indices to arrays or
  vectors.
- Do not use default values in public functions
- Use assertions to detect programming errors, e.g. whenever you make
  assumptions on how your code is used
- Use exceptions only when the execution of the program has to abort because of
  erroneous user input
- We allow to use 3rd-party libraries directly. No wrapper matching the coding
  rules is required. Allowed libraries are: STL.
- When throwing, omit the brackets, i.e. `throw "error"`.
- Error messages should start with a lower case letter.
- Use the `auto` keyword if and only if one of the following
  - The type is explicitly repeated on the RHS (e.g. a constructor call)
  - Adding the type will increase confusion (e.g. iterators, function pointers)
- Avoid `assert`. If the condition is an actual invariant, use INVARIANT,
  PRECONDITION, POSTCONDITION, CHECK_RETURN, UNREACHABLE or DATA_INVARIANT. If
  there are possible reasons why it might fail, throw an exception.
    - Use "should" style statements for messages in invariants (e.g. "array
      should have a non-zero size") to make it clear both the violation and the
      expected behavior. (As opposed to "no zero size arrays" where it isn't
      clear if the zero-size array is the problem, or the lack of it).
    - The statements should start with a lower case letter.
- All raw pointers (such as those returned by `symbol_tablet::lookup`) are
  assumed to be non-owning, and should not be `delete`d. Raw pointers that
  point to heap-allocated memory should be private data members of an object
  which safely manages the pointer. As such, `new` should only be used in
  constructors, and `delete` in destructors. Never use `malloc` or `free`.

# Architecture-specific code
- Avoid if possible.
- Use `__LINUX__`, `__MACH__`, and `_WIN32` to distinguish the architectures.
- Don't include architecture-specific header files without `#ifdef` ...

# Output
- Do not output to `cout` or `cerr` directly (except in temporary debug code,
  and then guard `#include <iostream>` by `#ifdef DEBUG`)
- Derive from `messaget` if the class produces output and use the streams
  provided (`status()`, `error()`, `debug()`, etc)
- Use `\n` instead of `std::endl`

# Unit tests
- Unit tests are written using [Catch](https://github.com/philsquared/Catch)
- For large classes:
  - Create a separate file that contains the tests for each method of each
    class
  - The file should be named according to
    `unit/class/path/class_name/function_name.cpp`
- For small classes:
  - Create a separate file that contains the tests for all methods of each
    class
  - The file should be named according to `unit/class/path/class_name.cpp`
- Catch supports tagging, tests should be tagged with all the following tags:
  - [core] should be used for all tests unless the test takes more than 1
    second to run, then it should be tagged with [long]
  - [folder_name] of the file being tested
  - [class_name] of the class being tested
  - [function_name] of the function being tested

---

You are allowed to break rules if you have a good reason to do so.

---

# Pre-commit hook to run cpplint locally

To install the hook
```sh
cp .githooks/pre-commit .git/hooks/pre-commit
```
or use a symbolic link. Then, when running git commit, you should get the
linter output (if any) before being prompted to enter a commit message. To
bypass the check (e.g. if there was a false positive), add the option
`--no-verify`.
